Dave Sirullin.
Okay, first of all I wanted to ask the obvious question.
I haven't found too much biographical about you yet.
And I wondered how you got involved with science fiction as a youngster.
Did you start reading it as an adolescent and work your way up through the fan structure or something?
I read it from the time I was about 13 or 14 years old.
But where I was living, the idea of fandom was unknown at the time.
I was raised in East Yorkshire in England.
And so far as I knew, for a long time, in fact, until I went off to the university,
I was the only person I knew who read science fiction.
And then when I got to the university, I found it was not all that uncommon.
But at least until I was 18, it was a private activity.
And there was no organized effort.
There were no groups of people discussing it, or there were no conventions or anything like that.
It was a solitary reading activity.
And I got into it simply because I was interested in science.
And it was the only type of writing, apart from science fact, that appealed to someone interested in science.
There wasn't much of it around, of course.
There was a period I'm talking about.
There were no English magazines, that I recall,
and about the only things that came over from the United States were astounding,
which then became analog, and galaxy, and occasionally amazing stories and fantastic stories.
And that was about it.
And so you were never really involved in any kind of fan structure then?
Not in England. In fact, not until after I had begun to publish stories in this country.
I was never involved in any fan activities until 1977, which was here in Washington,
when I went to Disclave and found out of those whole new world of fan activities out there.
Could you just briefly tell me how you got your first story published?
Was it a long series of rejection slips, or did you hit it right away?
It was a reasonably long one.
I can't say that I had an endless string of rejections.
I started to write in 1976 and didn't have any previous background of trying to write fiction of any kind.
So I wasn't too discouraged because I realized in my first story or two that I was evolving rapidly.
In other words, I could reread things of a few months before and say,
my Lord, no wonder nobody would buy that.
But I had, I probably had 20 rejections in total before I sold anything.
And I went on getting rejections after that with some degree of regularity and still do.
But I've become used to it when I first wrote.
If it hadn't been for the fact that a few months later I could myself see what was going wrong,
I might have been discouraged by rejections.
But as it was, I could sympathize with the editors having to read the stuff I'd sent them.
And I was not at all sure when I began what style of science fiction I would want to write.
I don't know if that makes sense as a statement,
but I now consider that there are a number of different styles,
verging from the very literary and totally unscientific to the very scientific and quasi-literate.
And usually people write for a particular audience.
And I was threshing around at the time and I wasn't quite sure what I was writing,
which is another reason that I think I sympathized with the editors.
I find that amazing that you didn't start writing for 76 because I'm an English teacher
and very sensitive to style and so forth because I teach literature.
And my goodness, I just can't believe that you did.
I mean, it's almost like you started publishing first-class science fiction with your first book.
Well, thank you for the compliment.
I don't say I haven't written anything at all, but I have written fiction.
I had written a lot of nonfiction, a lot of technical reports,
but I had never attempted a fictional form until 76.
But I was always critical of the way reports were written when I was writing nonfiction.
I felt that people didn't try to make them interesting or clear.
And perhaps that was an apprenticeship which helped me when I came to write fiction.
But I don't know. It's hard to evaluate what you write yourself.
Yeah, it is. I know that. Before I get down to some questions about your work,
I was curious about the Earth Satellite Corporation.
Are you still the vice president for research and development?
Yes, that's right.
Can you tell me a little bit about what the corporation does?
Yes, what we do is we take information from satellites that look at the Earth
as opposed to looking out in space somewhere.
And we use that information in looking for natural resources on the Earth
and in measuring them and monitoring them.
So for instance, we have exploration programs in which we look for oil and gas
and minerals around the world.
We have other projects in which we analyze the condition of surface water or of land use.
We're just finishing a big project at the State of Pennsylvania
looking at their abandoned mine lands to see what condition they're in.
And that's done sometimes from aerial observations in aircraft,
but mostly we use satellite data.
And the company is now approaching 13 years old and in a sense was started too soon.
I was there at the beginning, but our first few years were very difficult
because we found that we were in a field in which almost no one knew what we were doing.
And we would spend lots of our time trying to explain to people the potential
that we believed we could see in the field.
Well now, enough people have seen examples of it that we find it much easier.
So things have become much smoother for the company in the last few years.
Okay, if we have time a little later or as I asked you questions about your work,
I probably can work some more of that satellite thing in because I am curious about that.
But I want to make sure we have time to get down to some things about your own novels and...
I've done nonfiction books on that subject or maybe you don't.
Well, let's see, has Earthwatch one of those?
Yeah, it does watch as the only one at the moment,
but I'm now working on the manuscript for a book called Man on Earth
which will again be looking at the Earth with satellite images.
And it's very similar to Earthwatch except it will concentrate more on the works of man
and how man is visible by his activities.
I should say man and woman, I suppose.
How our actions become visible on the Earth and what they look like.
Yeah, I knew you'd written that book, Earthwatch, but I have to confess
I just haven't been able to find a copy of it.
It's not been out in paperback, has it?
No, it may not be. It's a $25 book
which puts most people off.
It's more a coffee table book than a book that people sit and read through.
But it did very well.
It sold over 100,000 hardcover copies which amazes me
and I suppose is the reason why I'm doing a sequel.
These are publishers like that.
But it's not a book that people would sit and read, I think.
It's a book that people would pick up and look at
for things that they have to be particularly interested in.
Perhaps their hometown, perhaps a particular type of application
such as looking at deserts or looking at the Great Bays and harbors and so on.
I don't think sitting down and reading it through would be a very entertaining experience.
Okay, I might keep my eye out for that in the future if I can see it.
Listen that...
In this country.
Pardon me?
McMillan published it in this country.
Listen, your novel, Web Between the Worlds,
the idea of a satellite that's linked to the Earth.
I wonder if anyone had gone beyond the speculative stage
and any actual plans are in effect for that?
No, because the strength of materials question is still the limiting factor.
We have materials now that are between five to ten times too weak to make the main cable.
And so I would say until material science develops
and stronger materials become available, no one will try and make it in practice.
But what they will do is they'll take little steps along the way,
by which I mean they will suspend, for example, a satellite from a very long cable
so that it can sit at a lower orbit than the natural one.
So it can be close to the Earth than the natural orbit at that speed.
And people are already talking of cable experiments from the shuttle
in which they let out 100 or 200 kilometers of cable.
But of course it's a long way away from the whole 24-hour tethered satellite
that is in the web between the worlds.
How long did it take you to write that novel?
About...
Oh, that's a tough question, because what usually happens is the idea is ferment for a while.
What about between eight and nine months, I would say?
It was about the best estimate I can make.
I'm not a scientist, of course, but the method you had of anchoring that beanstalk
where the huge hole was dug near Quito and the thousands of millions of tons of dirt
and rocks were exploded in on it, is that a feasible way to do that?
It's about the only way, I think, in practice.
You have to hold the thing down by weight on the Earth end.
In other words, what you've got to do is to make sure there's just enough mass at the bottom sitting there.
Now, there's several ways you could propose to do that.
One is to build the satellite from orbit at synchronous altitude down to the Earth
and then anchoring it is an easier job because you can put material into it a little at a time.
You can bootstrap if you like, make a very small cable and gradually build up to a larger one.
I think that the technology we will have in 100 years' time, though, is such that things we now consider
hair-raising and scary and difficult, people will take for granted.
To give an analogy, I like to quote, if you told people 100 years ago that there'd be hundreds of tons of metal up above the cities,
they'd say, well, you could never sleep at night because you'd be afraid they'd fall on top of you all the time.
But now people just curse aircraft because of the noise.
They don't actually think that those hundreds of tons of metal suspended up there.
And we're not in constant fear of things collapsing because we have some trust in the technology.
I believe 100 or 150 years from now, things we now consider hair-raising and scary will be commonplace,
which is why I chose a more way out method of anchoring the beanstalk than the simplest one.
I told Harry Ruppo, who's a friend of Arthur Clark when we were talking about this,
that as people get older, they get more conservative.
And 30 years ago, I think Arthur Clark would have chosen a different way of anchoring his space elevator,
but that's just conjectural.
Yeah, I was going to get to Clark in just a few minutes.
As long as you brought him up, let me ask you the, I know the story of it,
but could you briefly relate how it happened that you had, was it his coincidence that both of you happened to be writing on that subject at the same time?
It's not really very surprising because the idea has been around a long time.
The idea was proposed back in 1960, and I read of it in 1966, I read of it,
which was the first time it was published in the West.
A Russian called Art Sutanov published it in 1960, but he published it in Russian in a publication that no one ever saw or heard of.
But I remember the 1966 publication in Science Magazine and thinking that's a neat idea,
and putting it off in the back of my head, and presumably several others had noticed it and thought of it at the same time.
And it's a coincidence that Clark and I should write the book so close together,
but in a sense, if the books hadn't been written so close together, they would not both have been written.
Because when somebody has written a book on a subject like that, there's a tendency for other people not to write with that same technological development.
So once one person has done it, it's sort of been done.
The coincidence was that after I had reached the point where I had sent my manuscript off to Ace Books,
a friend of mine said that he had that Clark had written this book which was then available in Galles, in which he had a space elevator.
And when I read the book, I sent Clark my manuscript, and he wrote back and said he was fascinated, but he wasn't that surprised.
And when I read his book, I realized what he meant by that.
What he meant was that when you get right down to it, the basic physics dictates what the structure must be like,
but it's very natural to have your hero previously making a bridge, a bridge builder, because this is in a sense a bridge from the earth up to orbit.
We had both, in fact, chosen heroes with very similar names. That was a coincidence.
His hero was called Morgan, mine was called Merlin, and before they built the space elevator, they had both been the world's leading builder of bridges.
But there were some other rather strange coincidences that were not obvious from reading the books.
One of them was when I was thinking of my principal character, I had as a model for him a 19th century English engineer called Brunel.
Well, it turned out that Clark actually had Brunel in his book and references to him, and that's an odd coincidence that is perhaps explained by the fact that Clark came from England,
and so did I, and we were sensitive to the English engineering tradition. That's the only way I can explain that.
But there were a number of coincidences. It's not too surprising that we should write books in which the beanstalk or space elevator looks very similar,
but there are other things that are a bit more surprising than that.
But as one of my characters keeps on saying in a different book, the laws of probability not just permit coincidences, they absolutely require them.
And to me, it's not that surprising that Clark and I should have written the same book at the same time. Not the same book if you follow me, but books with a similar theme.
Okay, very good. You have so many things going in that book besides the beanstalk, you know, the goblins and Atlantis and so forth.
Why did you, was there any idea behind or any reason why you put Caliban in it?
I needed, for several reasons. One is I'm very interested in cephalopods in the square and the octopus,
because they are the most advanced invertebrate animals. And I have known for quite a while that squids and octopus are supposed to be very smart creatures.
So when I wanted a very difficult being to communicate with, the obvious first thought, which many people do, is to have a computer as a character.
But I felt since I had a water world in Atlantis, it would be more interesting for me to create a situation in which the sea creature, Caliban, communicates with the humans only with the help of a computer.
In other words, the computer is an essential part of the communication process.
The relationship between the computer and Caliban is a very complex one, that even the human characters in the book, so they don't totally know what's going on.
I simply felt that was more interesting than perhaps having a computer as an instrument. A smart computer has been done quite a lot,
but I felt the computer and cephalopod combination hadn't been done anywhere that I could see and was a more interesting thing to write about.
I was also able to do that to allow Caliban to have the hatred for the principal villain of the book, who is not really regular, who is ostensibly the main villain, but is actually the fellow who's working for regular.
Oh yeah, definitely. That's Morel, right?
Right. Yeah, except in a sense, many people would say that Regular was the villain, but I'll put Morel to me, who was always the villain.
Well, that was clear to me. Oh yes.
Right.
When you build a story or a book around a technological idea, such as the beanstalk or maybe implants or the mat and link or form change, whatever, are you seriously pursuing or examining that or just playing with wild ideas for the sake of the story?
It depends on the story. If I believe that the device is technologically possible and that someday we will have it, then I try to develop the consequences of that rather seriously.
And in a sense, I'm attempting prediction as opposed to writing entertainment. But on the other hand, if I don't really believe something is likely to happen at all, then I'm writing for the fun of it.
I'm writing and don't expect to be taken seriously. I realize that that's difficult for the reader because the author does not signal which ideas he thinks are to be taken seriously and which ones are purely for entertainment.
But I usually have a fairly good dividing line in my own head. For example, the idea of an implant, I believe that we will certainly have implants, not necessarily for connections to the brain, but we will have rather smart built-in sensors in the human body within 20 years, which allow various bodily functions to be controlled when they get out of line.
The pacemaker is already an implant, the heart pacemaker. But that's just the beginning. As we get our micro-computer technology down to smaller, lighter, less power-demanding units, we will start to see implants that do many other things in the human body.
For instance, to help control a pinnaker digestive system, to help someone sleep who has real troubles sleeping, you need something that gets involved with the sleep-producing signals, which come from the back of the brain in an area called the reticular formation.
Things like this, I believe, we will really have within 20 years.
Now, those are the introsomatic chips in my brother's keeper that you're talking about.
Yes, but it started before that. It started with a story called, Bounded in a Nutshell, in which I had proposed that as the logical conclusion was one in which the human brain could be hooked in to a microchip, which could then be used to communicate with other individuals having implants by radio signals.
The difference is in my brother's keeper that they weren't just brain communications, they were used anywhere in the body that people felt appropriate. But it built on an idea that was in Bounded in a Nutshell, which was a story published in Analog in 78, I suppose.
I read that one. I thought there you were also trying to, well, I don't know, talk about the importance of the space program that this might do, I mean, detract from it somehow.
Well, it would limit people in terms of the distance they were willing to go away from the rest of the group, because if you ever did achieve through radio communication what would look to us without technology like telepathy, then people would really miss it.
And they would perhaps then not want to travel away from the group. But it's an interesting question. There have always been people who are lonely by nature and who don't like humanity. And I would assume that there would always be such people and there would always be available to go off and explore.
It might mean that nobody else was interested in funding it though, which was the point I was making, that humanity would turn inward at that point.
Okay, the brain operation that you describe in My Brother's Keeper, is that within the grasp of modern science or medicine?
No, not yet. And that's the reason, the only reason that I put that book into a date which is really about 1990. The hero is 33 and he was born when Sputnik was launched, which was 57.
So the reader can, if he chooses, deduce it set in 1990. But the only reason putting it a few years ahead was because the techniques for re-growing severed nerve tissue in humans have not been developed.
There are lots of experiments going on with that and the lower animals, such as amphibians, will readily re-grow a severed nerve. In human beings, what happens is when you sever the nerve, you get what appears at the beginning.
You think it's going to re-grow. It shows all the signs of putting out a new tendril and axon, which is going to connect the nerve cells. And then it doesn't complete the connection.
And no one quite knows why. And in My Brother's Keeper, I suggest that the thing that's getting in the way is a proliferation of glial cells, which when you sever a nerve cell do in fact grow rapidly and appear to impede the nerve cells from reconnecting.
But nobody quite knows why. I suspect that in 10 years people will know why. They will have techniques to make nerve cells regenerate and they'll have a whole new family of methods for treating paraplegics and anyone else who has had damage to the spinal cord, which is usually, the problem there is usually you've destroyed the nerve cells and you are no longer getting signals through the motor system.
So I believe 10 years or less will give us that sort of advance.
I got the strong impression in that novel that you had left it open for a possible sequel since you had Zan still alive.
Well, I intentionally left it open-ended, but I doubted if I would write a sequel. In the same way, I suppose, I left the end of Sight of Proteus open. But I have not ever written a sequel because I always like to write something new.
So I feel that it would be less interesting if I were to write a sequel. Certainly the characters are there, but I think a sequel would probably be more of a straight thriller and the science fiction overtones would have almost disappeared because at that point the twin brothers are beginning to integrate to a single personality.
So I don't think I could simply write a sequel without some radically new development within it, which is not impossible. It's just I haven't got one in mind.
Okay, let's see. Leo was the one who was the spy or the guy who was working on an introsomatic chip business. Is he the one that really wants to find Zan or is it Lionel? And I wasn't quite sure why he even wanted to find her. Was it the thrill, the danger, the fascination he had with her?
What has been happening through the book is that it begins. Lionel, although he is the one with the consciousness, he's the one who thinks he knows who he is when they recover consciousness, has always been the subordinate partner.
His brother Leo had always been the stronger personality, the more outgoing one and really the dominant one. Now through the book Lionel is gradually taking on more of his brother's characteristics.
And certainly at the beginning of the book Lionel would never have dreamed of going off and chasing danger because it wasn't his disposition. So that by the end they have somewhat fused in personality to the point where it's Leo who is really driving them along to go out and go after the criminals for the same reason he had always done it,
which is that it was the best form of excitement. He got excitement from it and he said at the end that there's really no thrill like it, which is this type of chase.
But that in a sense is Leo's personality speaking by that point. Lionel was the somewhat quiet and retiring twin, but by the end of the book it's no longer Lionel who is making most of the decisions.
Leo has again become the dominant twin in a psychological sense. That's the thing I had in mind.
Yeah, that's the way I had assumed myself the way I'd read it. That book is so fast paced and exciting. I wondered if it seemed to me perfect for the movies. Is it too early for movie rights or has anybody wondered about that?
I thought he came out last month and nobody has said anything, but with that book I actually tried to write in a different style than the one I usually write.
I tried, I'm very fond of a man who writes straight thrillers, a man called Dick Francis, who doesn't write science fiction. He usually writes about horses as a matter of fact.
He's an English writer and one of the things I liked about Dick Francis is he writes an extremely fast moving book. I decided to see if I could write a faster moving book than I had written before.
That's what my brother's people was my attempt to do it within the science fiction framework. But nobody has said anything yet. As I said it's only been out for a few weeks.
Okay, I think of all your stories. Like I say, I'm an English teacher. I'm a medievalist and I study England and so forth, literature of England. I think of all your work, the ones I'm most fascinated with are those stories about Erasmus Darwin.
And I wondered if those three stories that were published in Erasmus Magister, were those originally published in that volume or was there some kind of publication in other magazines?
They were published in different places and it's an interesting point. The first one was published as a fantasy in fantastic stories. The second one was published in Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery magazine.
And the third one in time I'm talking now in data publication was published in fantasy and science fiction. Now in practice, the devil of Malcour was the last one written. That's the first one in Erasmus Magister, but I wrote that last.
But I was not quite sure when I was writing them, whether I was writing science fiction or fantasy or some type of historical detective. And I finally decided it really didn't make any difference. I was trying to tell a story about what I consider to be a very interesting real person.
And I tried to get the facts about Erasmus Darwin accurate so that I was not doing any distortion to his beliefs and views or life history, but I permitted myself license when it came to the things that happened to him.
So it was interesting. It was a very interesting set of stories to write. Sort of very difficult to write. I don't know why, perhaps because I was trying to put myself back in the 18th century framework.
In other words, the sort of the impetus for those stories was your interest in Erasmus Darwin.
Yes, I've been interested in him for a long time. Somebody I found much more fascinating as a personality than his grandson Charles Darwin.
Erasmus Darwin I had known about since I first went to Cambridge because he attended the same college at Cambridge as I did. And there were books about him in the library and so on.
And so I have an early fascination with him. And I found him especially interesting because he did so many different things and was a poet and a philosopher and an inventor and a famous physician.
And he was just a fascinating combination. I decided that what I would try to do would be to have him apply his powers of observation, which were famous throughout Europe in his day.
And as he was noted for being able to diagnose diseases by looking at people and observing them closely, I decided that that power of observation would serve him well if he had to solve other mysteries.
He was also a person who was strongly rationalistic. He didn't believe in supernatural explanations.
So I decided there that it would be logical for him, through his powers of observation and deduction, to seek and find rational explanations to things that everyone else in the story thought were supernatural, which was very reasonable.
200 years ago, people were very ready to believe supernatural answers to most things. So that was the logic behind the stories. And I'm sort of writing another one. I think I'll just keep writing those, but rather slowly.
And I tend to move around the British Isles and to set them in different parts of England or Scotland or Wales or Ireland, which I find another interesting thing to do. But I probably won't finish that until next spring.
Yeah, the three stories that were in that volume, I can understand the background to say the first one, the Loch Ness Monster one, and also the one about the race of little people who branched off from humanity.
But I wanted to slam, but the mortal had been based on any kind of legend or local local stories.
Well, there is a legend in East Anglia about a phantom black hound called Black Shuck that appears on the roads of East Anglia, which is where the story took place, and chases travelers and kills them in tethered pieces.
And of course, the villagers in the story would look on the reappearance of the Lambethy Markle as being very similar to this legendary hound.
But that is just a local legend. I don't know of it anywhere else in the British Isles. And it's not too central. The central element is that a disease is one of the few things which can go on through many generations.
You know, they led to the curse that people talk about, the witch's curse or something, is not plausible if you want to be rational about it.
But the idea that certain diseases have passed on through a family for hundreds of years is very well established.
And I simply use the fact that you can induce epilepsy by a regular pattern of light, which is also well known now, but was much less well known 100 or 200 years ago.
Okay, in your fiction, one thing that fascinates me is the fact that you are so very hard to pin down. It's almost like you said a moment ago that you picked a brand new style for my brother's keeper.
But you also seem to blend science fiction, whether it's categories too, like the detective story with Erasmus Magister and the spy story with my brother's keeper and so forth.
You keep moving around and keep your reader shaken up a little. And I wonder if there was a conscious intent behind that?
It's not to watch a conscious intent as the fact that I like to read all those categories of story. I read a lot of detective fiction. I read thrillers. I read science fiction.
And when I'm thinking of a story, I want to write the type that fits. I'm told, as you say, it may be bad for the in building up a readership because readers like something predictable.
If they buy a wrecked out book, they want it to be about Nero Wolfe, even if they've read 40 Nero Wolfe books.
And if they pick up a Conan Doyle story, even though he wrote tons of other things, the strong preference would be for a Sherlock Holmes.
And I think that's one reason why theories in science fiction do quite well.
E. C. Tub must have about 30 of his doomerest theories out. But I would think that they're extremely boring to write.
And as you probably know, Conan Doyle very much wished he could have killed off Sherlock Holmes, but the readers kept saying, give us more Sherlock Holmes stories.
But I don't think that the writer gets much pleasure from writing the same book in a stylistic sense or a thematic sense.
I would say that must be awful.
And one reason why I'm somewhat glad I don't write full time because the pressure to produce a series, I'm sure is there much more for full time writers.
It's much easier to produce a series in one sense because you've got the characters available and you've got the settings available.
And to the reader, those are familiar landmarks, which many people like to have.
But if you're writing with any interest in the ideas of the stories, it's very difficult to write a series because it constrains the new things you can do.
You have to do everything consistent with the previous world that you've built up.
I know they're very common, but I think they're very common for commercial reasons that writers find they're popular with readers.
But I don't think that they're popular with writers in terms of the enjoyment of the writing process.
So I must admit I've done no polling of writers to find it out.
I'm speaking in terms of what I would like to write when I sit down and write something.
Well, I agree with that.
Usually a series book or many times a trilogy or even longer a series like that, it really falls off in quality after the original.
In fact, we were talking to Brian Aldis a few months ago and he just deplored the tendency to capitalize on the success of the first book by writing two more and making a trilogy.
Usually the other two books are not very good.
I thought he is writing a trilogy at the moment.
I know.
That's the ironic thing, but the Helliconia Spring, which I have and have not read, is supposedly going to be not really the first book of a trilogy.
But merely the first of three books set in a particular world.
But I will see how that works out.
But I agree with him.
It's a thing to deplore.
And my own experience of reading sequels, never mind trilogies, is that you don't get nearly the pleasure that you've got from the first one.
I can think of Dune, for example, which to me has become progressively less interesting after the first book, Dune itself.
Children of Dune, Dune Messiah and God Emperor of Dune, none of them have captured my interest.
In the case of Larry Niven, I felt Ringworld engineers just couldn't get me into it the way that Ringworld did.
In the case of Gateway, Beyond the Blue Event Horizon wrapped things up, but I couldn't get any real interest in what happened to them.
So this is very common, as you say.
Sequels tend to go downhill from the original.
And I think it's largely because all that the sequel does is explain the mysteries left over from the first one.
Those mysteries are often part of the interest.
The thoughts that you're left with when you finish a book are important and you don't want every last, not neatly tied.
And that's why I didn't like Ringworld engineers.
It explained where the Ringworld came from, but it didn't have the impact of the original.
Okay, of all the science fiction writers, in fact of all the writers, contemporary writers that I read, I can't think of one who I think has more fun writing than you do.
I think I do.
I certainly love to sit down and write.
I often don't have time to do it, but that's a different consideration.
I find that the several things that helped me, one is that I don't have to do it, that I'm doing it as a hobby.
Another is that I write lots of nonfiction, and when I write nonfiction, I'm constrained in what I can think.
In other words, if you're writing respectable science, you somewhat have to put yourself into an acceptable framework.
And if you think outrageous thoughts, you can't really write them down or you have to limit yourself.
Whereas in fiction, you can think the most outrageous thoughts imaginable, and generally speaking, the more outrageous they are, the more people like them.
So I do enjoy writing, and I like to play around.
I like the fact that a story gives you an opportunity to express an idea or to express a point of view, and occasionally to preach.
I don't approve of people preaching at me in stories.
I find the temptation sometimes irresistible when I'm writing them.
Okay. You answered my next two or three questions with that one. That's good.
Do you... I think you answered this a little while ago. Let me ask it to you in a different way.
Do you see yourself as an entertainer or as an informer?
Largely as an entertainer.
So I will qualify that by saying I'm now writing a book, or it's actually a series of stories which will be published as a book, and I'm writing the final story for Jim Bain at Tor Books, in which I will have a rather lengthy appendix in which, because the stories are all hard science fiction with lots of science content,
I'm going to explain in the appendix where I have followed what is now accepted as real science, where I have extrapolated it in a reasonable way, and where I have simply made things up that I don't consider likely.
And I always feel that when I was reading science fiction a long time ago and had not got much of a scientific background, I was always unsure in a story that used the vocabulary of science.
I was always unsure whether I was reading a description of real science or complete, pocus pocus that someone had invented, and I couldn't draw that dividing line, and of course the author doesn't usually draw the dividing line for you.
So in this case I thought just for the fun of it, for the five stories I would put in a factual appendix in which I say these stated facts about what we think black holes are like are consistent with the best modern physics, these I had to make up because I needed them for the story.
And I don't know if readers will like that, but it's a thing that I haven't seen done and I suppose coming back to your question it does stem somewhere from a feeling that if you go to entertain you also have some responsibility to inform if you can, provided you don't make it do so much informing that it becomes a dollar ditch water for the reader.
Dr. Sheffield we need to flip the tape now, I wanted to ask you first. I don't have too many more questions, but can you give us a little more time if we flip the tape?
Yeah, no problem.
Okay, yeah we get to the end of the tape and I want to make sure we get it over before we get in the middle of an answer.
Okay.
So David's going to flip it over right now, just a second.
Thank you.
Let me ask you a question while you're flipping it.
Okay.
This is a question to you. Do you teach any science fiction courses?
Yes sir, we do. We've taught one now, I've taught one now for about three years.